Add beta changelog to the blog post (#2326)
tarantool/doc: doc/release/2021-08-releases.rst

-   The information about the state of synchronous replication is now available via the
    ``box.info.synchro`` interface
    (:tarantool-release:`2.7.3`, :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5191`).

> -   Field type UUID is now part of field type ``SCALAR``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   The UUID field type is now part of the ``SCALAR`` field type
```

    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`6042`).

> -   Field type ``UUID`` is now available in SQL, and a new UUID can be generated
>     using the new SQL built-in function ``UUID()``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   The ``UUID`` field type is now available in SQL. A new UUID can be generated
    using the new SQL built-in function ``UUID()``
```

    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5886`).

-   **[Breaking change]** The ``timeout()`` method of the ``net.box`` connection,
    marked deprecated more than four years ago (in ``1.7.4``), has been dropped.

>     It negatively affected the performance of hot ``net.box` methods, such as ``call()`` and ``select()``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It negatively affected the performance of hot ``net.box`` methods, such as ``call()`` and ``select()``
```

>     if those were called without specifying a timeout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if they were called without a specified timeout
```
otherwise it looks like the methods specify the timeouts by themselves, it's not the user who does it

    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`6242`).

-   Improved ``net.box`` performance by up to 70% by rewriting hot code paths in C
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`6241`).

> -   Introduce compact tuples that allow saving 4 bytes per tuple in case of small userdata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Introduced compact tuples that allow saving 4 bytes per tuple in case of small userdata
```
keeping verb tense consistent across bullet points is a good practice :)

    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5385`)

-   Now streams and interactive transactions over streams are implemented in iproto.

>     Stream is associated with its ID, which is unique within one connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Every stream is associated with its ID, which is unique within one connection.
```

>     All requests with the same, not zero stream ID, belong to the same stream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    All requests with the same non-zero stream ID belong to the same stream.
```

    All requests in the stream are processed synchronously.

>     The execution of the next request will not start until the previous one is completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The next request will not start executing until the previous one is completed.
```

>     If a request has zero stream ID, it does not belong to a stream and is processed in the old way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If a request's stream ID is ``0``, it does not belong to any stream and is processed in the old way.
```
if I understand this correctly

>     In ``net.box`, a stream is an object above the connection that has the same methods
>     but allows to execute requests sequentially. ID is generated on the client side automatically.
>     If a user writes his own connector and wants to use streams, he must transmit ``stream_id`` over the iproto protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In ``net.box``, a stream is an object above the connection that has the same methods
    but allows executing requests sequentially. The ID is generated on the client side automatically.
    If a user writes their own connector and wants to use streams, they must transmit the ``stream_id`` over the iproto protocol.
```
please don't use gendered pronouns for "user" and other humans

    The primary purpose of streams is transactions via iproto.

>     Each stream can start its transaction, so they allow multiplexing several transactions over one connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    As each stream can start a transaction, several transactions can be multiplexed over one connection.
```

>     There are multiple ways to begin, commit and rollback a transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    There are multiple ways to begin, commit, and rollback a transaction.
```

>     One can do that using appropriate stream methods, using ``call`` or ``eval`` methods,
>     or the ``execute`` method with SQL transaction syntax. User can mix these methods.
>     For example, start a transaction using ``stream:begin()``,
>     and commit transaction using ``stream:call('box.commit')`` or ``stream:execute('COMMIT')``.
>     If any request fails during the transaction, it will not affect the other requests in the transaction.
>     If a disconnect occurs when there is some active transaction in the stream,
>     this transaction will be rollbacked if it does not have time to commit before this moment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    One can do that using the appropriate stream methods, ``call``, ``eval``,
    or ``execute`` with the SQL transaction syntax. Users can mix these methods.
    For example, one might start a transaction using ``stream:begin()``
    and commit it with ``stream:call('box.commit')`` or ``stream:execute('COMMIT')``.
    If any request fails during the transaction, it will not affect the other requests in the transaction.
    If a disconnect occurs while there is an active transaction in the stream,
    that transaction will be rolled back if it hasn't been committed before the connection failure.
```

> -   Add new ``memtx_allocator`` option to ``box.cfg{}``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Add the new ``memtx_allocator`` option to ``box.cfg{}``.
```
or "a new option, ``memtx_allocator``"

>     It allows selecting the appropriate allocator for memtx tuples if necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It allows selecting an appropriate allocator for memtx tuples if necessary.
```

>     Possible values are ``system`` for malloc allocator and ``small`` for default small allocator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The possible values are ``system`` for the malloc allocator and ``small`` for the default small allocator.
```

    Implement system allocator, based on malloc: slab allocator, used for tuples allocation,
    has a particular disadvantage --- it tends to unresolvable fragmentation on specific workloads (size migration).

>     In this case, a user should be able to choose another allocator.
>     System allocator is based on malloc function but restricted by the same quota as a slab allocator.
>     The system allocator does not alloc all memory at the start. Instead, it allocates memory as needed,
>     checking that quota is not exceeded
>     (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5419`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In this case, the user should be able to choose another allocator.
    The system allocator is based on the malloc function but restricted by the same quota as the slab allocator.
    The system allocator does not alloc all the memory at the start. Instead, it allocates memory as needed,
    checking that the quota is not exceeded
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5419`).
```

Replication
~~~~~~~~~~~

> -   Introduce ``box.info.replication[n].downstream.lag`` field to monitor the state of replication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Introduced the ``box.info.replication[n].downstream.lag`` field to monitor the state of replication.
```

>     This member represents a lag between a moment when the main node writes a certain transaction to its own WAL
>     and a moment it receives an ack for this transaction from a replica
>     (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5447`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This represents the lag between the moment when the main node writes a certain transaction to its WAL
    and the moment it receives an ack for this transaction from the replica
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5447`).
```
I understand the lag value is independent for each replica, so I wrote "the replica" as "the replica in question"

> -   Introduce ``on_election`` triggers. The triggers may be registered via ``box.ctl.on_election()`` interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Introduce ``on_election`` triggers. The triggers can be registered via the ``box.ctl.on_election()`` interface
```
"may" denotes permission or uncertainty

>     and are run asynchronously each time ``box.info.election`` changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    and run asynchronously each time ``box.info.election`` changes
```
"run" doesn't seem to have a passive voice

    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5819`).

LuaJIT
~~~~~~

-   Introduce support for ``LJ_DUALNUM`` mode in ``luajit-gdb.py``
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`,
    :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`6224`).

-   Introduce preliminary support of GNU/Linux ARM64 and MacOS M1 (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`).
    In the scope of this activity, the following issues have been resolved:

>     *   Introduce support for a full 64-bit range of lightuserdata values (:tarantool-issue:`2712`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Introduce support for the full 64-bit range of lightuserdata values (:tarantool-issue:`2712`)
```

    *   Fixed memory remapping issue when the page left 47-bit segments

>     *   Fixed M1 architecture detection (:tarantool-issue:`6065`)
> 
>     *   Fixed variadic arguments handling in FFI on M1 (:tarantool-issue:`6066`)
> 
>     *   Fixed ``table.move`` misbehaviour when table reallocation occurs (:tarantool-issue:`6084`)
> 
>     *   Fixed Lua stack inconsistency when ``xpcall`` is called with the invalid second argument on ARM64
>         (:tarantool-issue:`6093`)
> 
>     *   Fixed ``BC_USETS`` bytecode semantics for closed upvalues and grey strings
> 
>     *   Fixed side exit jump target patching considering the range values of the particular instruction
>         (:tarantool-issue:`6098`)
> 
>     *   Fixed current Lua coroutine restoring on the exceptional path on ARM64 (:tarantool-issue:`6189`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Fixed M1 architecture detection (:tarantool-issue:`6065`).

    *   Fixed variadic arguments handling in FFI on M1 (:tarantool-issue:`6066`).

    *   Fixed ``table.move`` misbehavior in case of table reallocation (:tarantool-issue:`6084`).

    *   Fixed Lua stack inconsistency when ``xpcall`` is called on ARM64 with the invalid second argument
        (:tarantool-issue:`6093`).

    *   Fixed ``BC_USETS`` bytecode semantics for closed upvalues and grey strings.

    *   Fixed side exit jump target patching considering the range values of the particular instruction
        (:tarantool-issue:`6098`).

    *   Fixed current Lua coroutine restoring on the exceptional path on ARM64 (:tarantool-issue:`6189`).
```
added periods
still have some questions :)

Lua
~~~

-   Introduce the new method ``table.equals``. It compares two tables by value with
    respect to the ``__eq`` metamethod
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`, :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`).

Digest
~~~~~~

> -   Introduce the new hash types in digest module --- ``xxhash32`` and ``xxhash64``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Introduce new hash types---``xxhash32`` and ``xxhash64``---in the digest module.
```

    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`2003`).

Fiber
~~~~~

> -   Introduce ``fiber_object:info()`` to get info from fiber.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Introduce ``fiber_object:info()`` to get info from a fiber.
```

    Works as ``require(fiber).info()`` but only for one fiber
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`).

> -   Introduce ``fiber_object:csw()`` to get ``csw`` from fiber.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Introduce ``fiber_object:csw()`` to get ``csw`` from a fiber.
```

    Also, now ``csw`` (Context SWitch) of the new fiber is always equal to zero.

>     Previously it could be greater than zero

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Previously, it could be greater than zero
```

    and run asynchronously each time ``box.info.election`` changes
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5819`).

LuaJIT
~~~~~~

-   Introduced support for ``LJ_DUALNUM`` mode in ``luajit-gdb.py``
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`,
    :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`6224`).

-   Introduced preliminary support of GNU/Linux ARM64 and MacOS M1 (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`).
    In the scope of this activity, the following issues have been resolved:

    *   Introduced support for the full 64-bit range of lightuserdata values (:tarantool-issue:`2712`).

    *   Fixed memory remapping issue when the page left 47-bit segments (:tarantool-issue:`2712`).

    *   Fixed M1 architecture detection (:tarantool-issue:`6065`).

    *   Fixed variadic arguments handling in FFI on M1 (:tarantool-issue:`6066`).

    *   Fixed ``table.move`` misbehaviour in case of table reallocation (:tarantool-issue:`6084`).

    *   Fixed Lua stack inconsistency when ``xpcall`` is called on ARM64 with the invalid second argument
        (:tarantool-issue:`6093`).

>     *   Fixed ``BC_USETS`` bytecode semantics for closed upvalues and grey strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Fixed ``BC_USETS`` bytecode semantics for closed upvalues and gray strings.
```
An insight from @ ainoneko:
Это, похоже, про сборку мусора (только там серый цвет называется "grAy"):
"Tri-color Collector
● Each object is in one of three states: white,
gray, or black.
● Non-visited objects are marked white.
● Visited but not-traversed objects are marked
gray.
● Traversed objects are marked black."
https://www.lua.org/wshop18/Ierusalimschy.pdf

>     *   Fixed side exit jump target patching considering the range values of the particular instruction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Fixed side exit jump target patching with regard to the range values of a particular instruction
```

    :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`4770`).

-   Removed explicit cast from ``VARBINARY`` to numeric types and vice
    versa
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`,
    :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`4772`, :tarantool-issue:`5852`).

-   Fixed a bug where a string that is not ``NULL``-terminated
    could not be cast to ``BOOLEAN``, even if the conversion would be
    successful according to the rules
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`).

-   Now a numeric value can be cast to another numeric type only if the cast is precise.
    In addition, a ``UUID`` value cannot be implicitly cast to ``STRING/VARBINARY``.
    Also, a ``STRING/VARBINARY`` value cannot be implicitly cast to a ``UUID``
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`4470`).

-   Now any number can be compared to any other number, and values of any scalar type
    can be compared to any other value of the same type.
    A value of a non-numeric scalar type cannot be compared with a value of any other scalar type
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`4230`).

> -   Removed SQL built-in functions from ``_func`` system space

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Removed SQL built-in functions from the ``_func`` system space
```

    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`6106`).

-   The function is now looked up first in SQL built-in functions and then in user-defined functions
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`).

> -   Fixed incorrect error message in case of misuse of the function setting the default value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Fixed the incorrect error message in case of misuse of the function setting the default value
```

    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`).

-   The ``typeof()`` function with ``NULL`` as an argument now returns ``NULL``
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5956`).

-   Reworked the ``SCALAR`` and ``NUMBER`` types in SQL.

>     Removed implicit cast from ``SCALAR`` to any other scalar types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Removed the implicit cast from ``SCALAR`` to any other scalar types.
```

    Also, removed the implicit cast from ``NUMBER`` values to any other numeric type.
    It means that arithmetic and bitwise operations and concatenation are no longer allowed
    for ``SCALAR`` and ``NUMBER`` values. In addition, any ``SCALAR`` value can now be compared with values
    of any other scalar type using the ``SCALAR`` rules
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`6221`).

> -   Field type ``DECIMAL`` is now available in SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   The field type ``DECIMAL`` is now available in SQL.
```

>     Added implicit cast from ``INTEGER`` and ``DOUBLE`` to ``DECIMAL`` and vice versa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Added an implicit cast from ``INTEGER`` and ``DOUBLE`` to ``DECIMAL`` and vice versa.
```

>     It can participate in arithmetic operations and comparisons between ``DECIMAL``
>     and other defined numeric types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ``DECIMAL`` can participate in arithmetic operations and comparisons  with other defined numeric types
```

-   Fixed incorrect error message in case of misuse of the function setting the default value
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`).

-   The ``TYPEOF()`` function with ``NULL`` as an argument now returns ``NULL``

>     if a type cannot be determined from context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    if the type cannot be determined from context.
```

    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5956`).

    Also, ``TYPEOF(-NaN)`` will now return ``DOUBLE``.

>     ``TYPEOF(map_column)`` will now return ``VARBINARY`` instead of ``map``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    and ``TYPEOF(map_column)`` will now return ``VARBINARY`` instead of ``map``.
```

    In addition, the number of arguments is now always checked during parsing
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`6105`).

> -   **[Breaking change]** ``NUMBER`` data type  (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **[Breaking change]** for the ``NUMBER`` data type (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`)
```

    Arithmetic (``+ * - / % & | ~``) operations and bit-shift operations (``>> <<``) are now illegal.

    Example:

    ..  code-block:: none

        SELECT number_column + 1 was legal in version 2.8.
        Now it will cause an error.

> -   **[Breaking change]** ``SCALAR`` data type  (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **[Breaking change]** for the ``SCALAR`` data type (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`)
```

    Arithmetic (``+ * - / % & | ~``) operations and bit-shift operations (``>> <<``) are now illegal.
    Concatenation (``||``) operations are now illegal.
    Values in ``SCALAR`` columns now have data type ``SCALAR``, not the value's data type.

    Example:

    ..  code-block:: none

        TYPEOF(CAST(1 AS SCALAR)) was INTEGER in version 2.8.
        Now it will be SCALAR.

> -   **[Breaking change]** Arithmetic operators must now have numeric operands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **[Breaking change]**: Arithmetic operators must now have numeric operands.
```

    String operands are illegal.

    Example:

    ..  code-block:: none

        SELECT 1 + '1' was 2 in version 2.8.
        Now it will cause an error.

> -   **[Breaking change]** Operations on SCALAR columns

Reviewer: -   **[Breaking change]** in operations on SCALAR columns

    Since the type of a value no longer determines whether an operation is valid,

>     comparisons and functions which require a specific type will no longer work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    comparisons and functions that require a specific type no longer work.
```

    Example:

    ..  code-block:: none

        if table T has only one row with a scalar column containing 'a':
        UPPER(scalar_column) was 'A' in version 2.8.
        Now it will cause an error.

-   **[Breaking change]**: The ``HEX()`` function (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`)
    ``STRING`` arguments are no longer acceptable; only ``VARBINARY`` arguments are allowed.

    Example:

    ..  code-block:: none

        HEX('a') was '41' in version 2.8.
        Now it will cause an error.

> -   **[Breaking change]** The ``POSITION()`` function (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`)

Reviewer: -   **[Breaking change]**: The ``POSITION()`` function (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`

    This fix also prevents the relay from timing out when a freshly subscribed
    replica needs rows from the end of a relatively long (hundreds of
    MBs) ``.xlog`` file
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`, :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5979`).

-   The counter in ``N rows processed`` log messages no longer
    resets on each newly recovered ``xlog``
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`, :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`).

-   Fixed wrong type specification when printing fiber state change.

>     It could lead to negative fiber's ID logging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It could lead to negative fiber IDs in the logs
```

    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5846`).

    For example,

    ..  code-block:: none

        main/-244760339/cartridge.failover.task I> Instance state changed

    instead of proper

    ..  code-block:: none

        main/4050206957/cartridge.failover.task I> Instance state changed

> -   Fiber IDs are switched to monotonically increasing unsigned 8-byte integers so that
>     there won't be IDs wrapping anymore. It allows to detect fiber's precedence by their IDs if needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Fiber IDs are now monotonically increasing unsigned 8-byte integers, so
    there is no ID wrapping anymore. It allows detecting fiber precedence by ID
```
anything is done only when needed :)

    This fix also prevents the relay from timing out when a freshly subscribed
    replica needs rows from the end of a relatively long (hundreds of
    MBs) ``.xlog`` file
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`, :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5979`).

-   The counter in ``N rows processed`` log messages no longer
    resets on each newly recovered ``xlog``
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`, :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`).

-   Fixed wrong type specification when printing fiber state change.
    It could lead to negative fiber IDs in the logs
    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5846`).

    For example,

    ..  code-block:: none

        main/-244760339/cartridge.failover.task I> Instance state changed

    instead of proper

    ..  code-block:: none

        main/4050206957/cartridge.failover.task I> Instance state changed

> -   Fiber IDs are now to monotonically increasing unsigned 8-byte integers, so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Fiber IDs are now switched to monotonically increasing unsigned 8-byte integers, so
```

Lua
~~~

> -   Fixed a bug when multibyte characters broke ``space:fselect()`` output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Fixed a bug where multibyte characters broke ``space:fselect()`` output
```

~~~

-   User-defined functions can now return a VARBINARY result to SQL
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`,
    :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`6024`).

-   Fixed assert when a DOUBLE value greater than -1.0 and less
    than 0.0 is cast to INTEGER and UNSIGNED
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`,
    :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`6225`).

-   Removed spontaneous conversion from INTEGER to DOUBLE in a field of the
    NUMBER type
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`,
    :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5335`).

-   All arithmetic operations can now accept numeric values only
    (:tarantool-release:`2.8.2`, :tarantool-release:`2.7.3`,
    :tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`5756`).

> -   Now function ``quote()`` will return the argument if the argument is DOUBLE —the same for all other numeric types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Now ``quote()`` returns the argument if the argument is DOUBLE, which is the same behavior as with other numeric types.
```

>     For types different than numeric, the function returns STRING

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For types other than numeric, the function returns a STRING
```

    (:tarantool-release:`2.10.0-beta1`, :tarantool-issue:`6239`).

> -   The ``TRIM()` function now does not lose collation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   The ``TRIM()`` function now does not lose collation
```
